@site and @navroot endpoints (#1465)
plone/plone.restapi: docs/source/navroot.md

---
html_meta:
  "description": "Navigation root is a concept that provides a way to root catalog queries, searches, and breadcrumbs in Plone."
  "property=og:description": "Navigation root is a concept that provides a way to root catalog queries, searches, and breadcrumbs in Plone."
  "property=og:title": "Navigation Root"
  "keywords": "Plone, plone.restapi, REST, API, site, navigation root"
---

(navigation-root-label)=

# Navigation root

> Plone has an idea called {term}`navigation root` which provides a way to root catalog queries, searches, breadcrumbs, etc. in a given section of the site.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plone has a concept called {term}`navigation root` which provides a way to root catalog queries, searches, breadcrumbs, and so on in a given section of the site.
```

This feature is useful when working with subsites or multilingual sites, because it allows the site manager to restrict searches or navigation queries to a specific location in the site.

This navigation root information is different depending on the context of the request.
For instance, in a default multilingual site when browsing the contents inside a language folder (`www.domain.com/en`), the context is `en` and its navigation root will be `/en/`.
In a non-multilingual site, the context is the root of the site (`www.domain.com`) and the navigation root will be `/`.

To get the information about the navigation root, the REST API has a `@navroot` contextual endpoint, which will return the correct information about it.
For instance, send a `GET` request to the `@navroot` endpoint in the root of the site:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_get.req
```

> The response will contain the navigation root information with the site :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response will contain the navigation root information with the site:
```

```{literalinclude} ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_get.resp
:language: http
```

> In a multilingual site (where the language root folders are naviation root objects), the endpoint will work in a similar way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a multilingual site where the language root folders are navigation root objects, the endpoint will work in a similar way.
```

If you request the `@navroot` of a given content type in the site, it will return the following.

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_content_get.req
```

The response will contain the navigation root information with the site:

````{literalinclude} ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_content_get.resp
:language: http

> 

Reviewer: A sentence explaining the request is missing.

Also both the request and response examples' content are identical. Is that deliberate, or copy-paste error?

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_site_get.req
````

> The response will contain the navigation root information with the site :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response will contain the navigation root information with the site:
```

If a simple `GET` request is done on the content item, a new entry will be shown on the `@components` entry with the URL of the `@navroot` endpoint.

In a standard site when querying the site root:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_get_expansion.req
```

The response will contain the navigation root information with the site:

```{literalinclude} ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_get_expansion.resp
:language: http
```

When querying a content type inside the root:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_content_get_expansion.req
```

The response will contain the navigation root information with the site:

```{literalinclude} ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_content_get_expansion.resp
:language: http
```

In a multilingual site, it will work similarly:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/site_get_expand_navroot.req
```

> The response will contain the navigation root information with the site :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response will contain the navigation root information with the site:
```

```{literalinclude} ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/site_get_expand_navroot.resp
:language: http
```

It will also work with language root folders (that are navigation roots):

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/site_get_expand_lang_folder.req
```

The response will contain the navigation root information with the site :

```{literalinclude} ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/site_get_expand_lang_folder.resp
:language: http
```

And also for contents inside the language root folders, where the navigation root will point to the language root folder:

``{eval-rst}
.. http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
:request: ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/site_get_expand_lang_folder_content.req

````

> The response will contain the navigation root information with the site :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response will contain the navigation root information with the site:
```

---
html_meta:

>   "description": ""

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "description": "Navigation root is a concept that provides a way to root catalog queries, searches, and breadcrumbs in Plone."
  "property=og:description": "Navigation root is a concept that provides a way to root catalog queries, searches, and breadcrumbs in Plone."
```

  "property=og:title": "Navigation Root"
  "keywords": "Plone, plone.restapi, REST, API, site, navigation root"
---

> ## Navigation root

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(navigation-root-label)=

# Navigation root
```

> Plone has an idea called `Navigation Root` which provides a way to root catalog queries, searches, breadcrumbs, etc. in a given section of the site. This feature is useful when working with subsites or multilingual sites, because allows the site manager to somehow restrict where the searches or navigation queries start on the site.

Reviewer: Please create a term in glossary.md, and we can merge it into the main documentation as well.

```suggestion
Plone has an idea called {term}`navigation root` which provides a way to root catalog queries, searches, breadcrumbs, etc. in a given section of the site.
This feature is useful when working with subsites or multilingual sites, because it allows the site manager to restrict searches or navigation queries to a specific location in the site.
```

> This navigation root information is different depending on the context where is requested. For instance in a default multilingual site, when browsing the contents inside a language folder, the navigation root will be the language folder, but in a non-multilingual site the navigation root will be the root of the site.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This navigation root information is different depending on the context of the request.
For instance, in a default multilingual site when browsing the contents inside a language folder (`www.domain.com/en`), the context is `en` and its navigation root will be `/en/`.
In a non-multilingual site, the context is the root of the site (`www.domain.com`) and the navigation root will be `/`.
```

> To get the information about the navigation root, the REST API has a `@navroot` contextual endpoint, which will return the correct information about it.

Reviewer: Combine this sentence into the next.

```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> For instance, send a `GET` request to the `@navroot` endpoint in the root of the site:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get information about the navigation root, send a `GET` request to the `@navroot` endpoint in the root of the site:
```

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_site_get.req
```

The response will contain the navigation root information with the site :

```{literalinclude} ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_site_get.resp
:language: http
```

> In a multilingual site, where the language folder is the navigation root, the response has the language

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a multilingual site where the language folder is the navigation root, the response has the language folder information:
```

> folder information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_lang_folder_get.req
```

> The response will contain the navigation root information with the site :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response will contain the navigation root information for the site:
```

```{literalinclude} ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_lang_folder_get.resp
:language: http
```

> In a multilingual site if the navigation root is requested for a content inside a language folder, the response has the language folder information as a navigation root:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a multilingual site, if the navigation root is requested for content inside a language folder, the response has the language folder information as a navigation root:
```

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_lang_content_get.req
```

> The response will contain the navigation root information with the site :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response will contain the navigation root information for the site:
```

```{literalinclude} ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_lang_content_get.resp
:language: http
```

> ## Expansion

Reviewer: ```suggestion

(navigation-root-expansion-label)=

## Expansion
```

This endpoint can be used with the {doc}`expansion` mechanism which allows getting more information about a content item in one query, avoiding unnecessary requests.

> If a simple `GET` request is done on the content item, a new entry will be shown on the `@components` entry, with the URL of the `@navroot` endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a simple `GET` request is done on the content item, a new entry will be shown on the `@components` entry with the URL of the `@navroot` endpoint.
```

---
html_meta:
  "description": "Navigation root is a concept that provides a way to root catalog queries, searches, and breadcrumbs in Plone."
  "property=og:description": "Navigation root is a concept that provides a way to root catalog queries, searches, and breadcrumbs in Plone."
  "property=og:title": "Navigation Root"
  "keywords": "Plone, plone.restapi, REST, API, site, navigation root"
---

(navigation-root-label)=

# Navigation root

Plone has an idea called {term}`navigation root` which provides a way to root catalog queries, searches, breadcrumbs, etc. in a given section of the site.
This feature is useful when working with subsites or multilingual sites, because it allows the site manager to restrict searches or navigation queries to a specific location in the site.

This navigation root information is different depending on the context of the request.
For instance, in a default multilingual site when browsing the contents inside a language folder (`www.domain.com/en`), the context is `en` and its navigation root will be `/en/`.
In a non-multilingual site, the context is the root of the site (`www.domain.com`) and the navigation root will be `/`.

> To get the information about the navigation root, the REST API has a `@navroot` contextual endpoint, which will return the correct information about it. For instance, send a `GET` request to the `@navroot` endpoint in the root of the site:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get the information about the navigation root, the REST API has a `@navroot` contextual endpoint, which will return the correct information about it.
For instance, send a `GET` request to the `@navroot` endpoint in the root of the site:
```

The response will contain the navigation root information with the site :

```{literalinclude} ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_site_get.resp
:language: http
```

In a multilingual site, where the language folder is the navigation root, the response has the language
folder information:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_lang_folder_get.req
```

The response will contain the navigation root information with the site :

```{literalinclude} ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_lang_folder_get.resp
:language: http
```

In a multilingual site if the navigation root is requested for a content inside a language folder, the response has the language folder information as a navigation root:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_lang_content_get.req
```

The response will contain the navigation root information with the site :

```{literalinclude} ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_lang_content_get.resp
:language: http
```

(navigation-root-expansion-label)=

> ## Expansion

Reviewer 2: Please provide an example for a request.
/plone/foo/bar?expand=navroot

Author: I have added examples for all of such cases:

- SIte root in a standard site
- Content inside root in a standard site
- Site root in a multilingual site
- Language root in a multilingual site
- Content inside language root in a multilingual site

For instance, in a default multilingual site when browsing the contents inside a language folder (`www.domain.com/en`), the context is `en` and its navigation root will be `/en/`.
In a non-multilingual site, the context is the root of the site (`www.domain.com`) and the navigation root will be `/`.

To get the information about the navigation root, the REST API has a `@navroot` contextual endpoint, which will return the correct information about it.
For instance, send a `GET` request to the `@navroot` endpoint in the root of the site:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_get.req
```

The response will contain the navigation root information with the site :

```{literalinclude} ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_get.resp
:language: http
```

> In a multilingual site (where the language root folders are naviation root objects), the endpoint will work in a similar way:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a multilingual site (where the language root folders are naviation root objects), the endpoint will work in a similar way.
```

> And if you request the @navroot of a given content in the site, it will return with it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you request the `@navroot` of a given content type in the site, it will return the following.
```

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_content_get.req
```

> The response will contain the navigation root information with the site :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response will contain the navigation root information with the site:
```

If a simple `GET` request is done on the content item, a new entry will be shown on the `@components` entry with the URL of the `@navroot` endpoint.

In a standard site when querying the site root:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_get_expansion.req
```

> The response will contain the navigation root information with the site :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response will contain the navigation root information with the site:
```

```{literalinclude} ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_get_expansion.resp
:language: http
```

> And also when querying a content inside the root:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When querying a content type inside the root:
```

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_content_get_expansion.req
```

> The response will contain the navigation root information with the site :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response will contain the navigation root information with the site:
```
